Well, today’s text comments mention
the effect that prejudice
had on Jesus’ disciples.
And as we think about that today
and how we are part of an organization
that is much more diverse
than in the first century,
it raises the question,
Does prejudice still have an impact
on God’s people today?
We’re very thankful
that we love and serve a God
who does not tolerate prejudice.
The Bible states that quite plainly.
Turn with me, please, to the book of Acts,
and we note the words
of the apostle Peter in Acts chapter 10.
In verse 34, it says:
“At this Peter began to speak, and he said:
“‘Now I truly understand
“‘that God is not partial,
“‘but in every nation
“‘the man who fears him and does what is right
is acceptable to him.’”
Now, if you look at the study note,
it mentions that the Greek phrase
for “is not partial”
literally means “is not one who takes faces.”
And that perfectly
describes Jehovah, doesn’t it?
He does not favor one face, one individual,
over another
because of their race, nationality,
social standing,
or any other external factors.
And that’s how
you and I strive to be as well.
However, we must acknowledge
that it is a challenge to be impartial,
largely because in today’s world
we are surrounded by prejudice.
So to answer that question:
Does prejudice have an impact
on God’s people today?
—indeed, it does.
We may be victims of it,
or we ourselves might hold some prejudice.
Interestingly, The Watchtower  back in 2013
made this comment, it said:
“If we are honest with ourselves,
“we have to admit that deep down
“we all harbor varying degrees of prejudice
in one form or another.”
So if this is something
that is a human tendency
and we’re all plagued with it,
at least to some degree,
then how do we overcome it?
Well, it might be helpful
to start with the word itself.
As Sister Leithiser mentioned,
the dictionary defines prejudice
as “a preconceived opinion
that is not based
on reason or actual experience.”
A preconceived opinion
has to do with how we think and how we feel
—thoughts that likely
have been shaped by our personal experiences,
our upbringing, and our environment.
Now, maybe when we think of prejudice,
perhaps our minds
go to or we focus on racial prejudice
—hatred or animosity toward someone.
We talked a little bit about that last week.
But The Watchtower
also mentioned that prejudices
can also be formed against
another person because of their weight,
gender, language, social status,
religion, or virtually
any perceived difference.
So if prejudice starts with our personality
or our personal preconceived opinions,
then the way to overcome it
has to start by elevating our minds
to God’s way of thinking.
Again, if we go back to the Bible,
this time to 1 Samuel chapter 16,
notice how Jehovah
brings this to light—1 Samuel chapter 16.
And let’s recall what happens
when Samuel goes to the house of Jesse
to appoint one of his sons as king.
Verse 6 says:
“As they came in and he saw Eliab, he said:
“‘Surely here before Jehovah
stands his anointed one.’
“But Jehovah said to Samuel:
“‘Do not pay attention
to his appearance and how tall he is,
for I have rejected him.’”
Now, if we stop there for a moment,
did you notice what Samuel did?
In this particular instance,
he was as that Greek phrase denoted,
“a taker of faces,” wasn’t he?
He looked at Eliab;
he saw how tall and how handsome he looked.
Surely, this must be Jehovah’s choice.
But note how the verse continues;
note the teaching point:
“‘For the way man
sees is not the way God sees,
“‘because mere man
sees what appears to the eyes,
but Jehovah sees into the heart.’”
That’s what matters to Jehovah
—what’s in our heart,
what we are on the inside.
And he’s looking
for those qualities in each of us
that reflect his impartiality.
Now, how is this of benefit to us,
since you and I cannot read hearts?
Well, let’s go back to the study note.
The rest of the study note
for Acts 10:34 gives us the answer,
because it says:
“Imitating God’s impartiality means,
“not making surface judgments,
but paying attention
to the character and qualities of others.”
Now, perhaps one way we can illustrate this
is with the example of a geode.
Now, look at this picture.
On its outside surface,
a geode looks pretty ordinary and nondescript
—no different than any big rock
or stone you’d find outside.
But if you break it open,
ah, quite a different story.
Now, when you look inside,
you see these beautiful
sparkling crystals of varying colors
that are just quite beautiful
and really radiant to the eye.
Well, what’s our point?
When we make surface judgments
or preconceived opinions about our brothers,
often aren’t we looking at them
like the outside of that geode?
All that we see is just the external surface.
And isn’t it so true
that perhaps if someone is shy,
quiet, or reserved,
it’s so easy to label them, isn’t it?
We sized them up,
and we quickly come to the conclusion:
“Ah, you know what, there’s not much there.
They really don’t have much to offer.”
Or it could be that the person is very
talkative, loud, extroverted—same thing.
We label them and form an opinion.
Could it be in those
particular instances that we have become
“a taker of faces”?
We’ve made a judgment
purely based on personal opinion
or what we feel is acceptable.
But to imitate Jehovah’s way of thinking,
we have to go beyond the surface;
we have to focus on the character
and the qualities of our brothers,
and with some people that may take time.
You know, with the geode, one expert stated:
“There are many
different ways to open a geode.
“But no matter how you do it,
the key is patience, patience, patience.”
And isn’t it true
that it’s the same with our brothers?
It takes time and patience
to get to know them,
time and patience
to understand the way that they think,
to show personal interest
by asking questions,
to work with them in the ministry,
and to consider their suggestions.
But when we do, well, we’re rewarded.
We begin to see the crystals;
we begin to see their inner beauty inside;
we discover true depth
in our brothers and sisters,
and hopefully they do in us as well.
Now, going back to Jesus’ disciples,
while the Bible candidly details
a number of accounts
showing their human traits
and their prejudicial feelings at times,
it also highlights
how they overcame those feelings.
Just look at how much we read and meditate
on the Christian Greek Scriptures
and how much those verses
and books emphasize love,
opening our hearts, loving our brothers,
getting along with one another,
and widening out.
The disciples did not allow
any deep-rooted feelings
or things from their upbringing
or their environment to control them.
And you and I can be the same.
But it all starts
with an honest self-examination:
‘Can I identify any traces
of prejudice within me?’
And if we can, well,
it all starts with our thinking
—elevating our thinking
to Jehovah’s way of thinking.
Let’s avoid surface judgments,
being “a taker of faces.”
Let’s take the time
to get to know our brothers
and appreciate their character and qualities
—their inner beauty.
Jesus told his disciples at Matthew 23:8:
“All of you are brothers.”
And what made them brothers?
At Matthew 12:50, Jesus said:
“For whoever does the will of my Father . . . ,
“that one is my brother
and sister and mother.”
It’s a nice reminder, isn’t it?
We are all part of a large spiritual family
united by our faith and love for God.
And if we see each other that way,
that will help us to remain humble
and recognize that we have no reason
to elevate ourselves above others.
Instead, we’re going to be filled
with so much love and appreciation
to be part of this organization
as we imitate our impartial God
and Father, Jehovah.